## 3.1. Contiguous vs. Linked Data Structures

### Contiguous Structures:

- Composed of single slabs of memory.
- Include: arrays, matrices, heaps, hash tables.

### Linked Structures:

- Composed of distinct chunks of memory bound together by pointers.
- Include: lists, trees, graph adjacency lists.

### 3.1.1. Arrays

**Advantages:**

- Constant-time access with index.
- Space efficiency: Consist purely of data, no space is wasted with links, formatting information, or end-of-record information.
- Memory locality: Physical continuity between successive data accesses helps exploit the cache memory on modern computers.

**Downside:**

- Cannot adjust the size in the middle of the program's execution.
- To allow additional records, we can allocate extremely large arrays, but this can waste space.

**Dynamic Array:**

- Enlarge arrays as we need them.
- Start with an array of size 1, and double its size each time we run out of space (m -> 2m).
- Doubling process: Allocate a new contiguous array of size 2m, copy the contents of the old array to the lower half of the new one, and free the space used by the old array.
- The waste involves the copying of old contents on each expansion.

**Calculate Number of Movements for Dynamic Array:**

- It takes log₂(n) doublings for the array to have n positions.
- Half the elements move once (the lower half), a quarter of the elements twice, and so on.
- Total number of movements:
  M = sum(i: 1 -> log2(n)) (i \* n / 2^i)
  = n \* sum(i: 1 -> log2(n)) (i / 2^i)
  <= n \* sum(i: 1 -> infinity) (i / 2^i)
  = 2n
- Each element moves only 2 times on average.
- Total work of managing the dynamic array: O(n).

### 3.1.2. Linked Lists

**Operations:** See code/linked-list.c

### Comparison with array:

**Advantage:**

- Overflow can never occur unless the memory is actually full.
- Insertion and deletion are simpler.
- With large records, moving pointers is easier than moving the items.

**Disadvantage:**

- Require extra space for storing pointers.
- Do not allow efficient random access to items.
- Arrays allow better memory locality and cache performance.

### Final thoughts:

- Both of these structures can be thought of as recursive objects (chopping off part of 1 array / list gives a new smaller array / list).
- This leads to simpler list processing, efficient divide-and-conquer algorithms such as quicksort and binary search.
