## 3.3. Dictionaries

- Permits access to data items by content.

### Primary operations:

- Search(k): return a pointer to the element whose key is k.
- Insert(x): add data item x to the set.
- Delete(x): given a pointer to data item x, remove it.

### Other operations:

- Max() / Min(): retrieve the item with the largest / smallest key.
- Predecessor(k) / Successor(k): retrieve the item whose key is immediately before / after k in sorted order.

### Example:

**Problem:** remove all duplicate names from a list, and print the result in sorted order.

**Solution:**

- Initialize an empty dictionary D, whose search key is the record name.
- Read through the list, insert the name if it is not already exists in D.
- When extract the names, start from Min(D) and repeatedly calling Successor until we obtain Max(D).

### Comparing Dictionary Implementations:

**Problem:**
What are the asymptotic worst-case running times for each of the seven
fundamental dictionary operations when the data structure is implemented as

- An unsorted array.
- A sorted array.
- A singly-linked unsorted list.
- A doubly-linked unsorted list.
- A singly-linked sorted list.
- A doubly-linked sorted list.

**Answer:**

1. Search

- unsorted array: O(n)
- sorted array: O(log(n)) - binary search
- singly-linked unsorted list: O(n)
- doubly-linked unsorted list: O(n)
- singly-linked sorted list: O(n) - binary search is no longer possible, just provide quick termination of unsuccessful searches.
- doubly-linked sorted list: O(n) - similar to singly-linked sorted list

2. Insertion

- unsorted array: O(1) - increment n and copy x to n-th cell of the array
- sorted array: O(n) - move items to make room for the new item
- singly-linked unsorted list: O(1) - add to the head
- doubly-linked unsorted list: O(1) - add to the head
- singly-linked sorted list: O(n) - find correct position
- doubly-linked sorted list: O(n) - find correct position

3. Deletion

- unsorted array:
  O(n) - remove the element x (we are given a pointer to x, so no need for searching), then move the successive elements up 1 position.
  O(1) - just overwrite A[x] with A[n], and decrement n.
- sorted array: O(n) - move items to fill a hole
- singly-linked unsorted list: O(n) - still have to search for the predecessor
- doubly-linked unsorted list: O(1) - find the predecessor and delete x
- singly-linked sorted list: O(n) - still have to search for the predecessor
- doubly-linked sorted list: O(1) - find the predecessor and delete x

4. Max / Min

- unsorted array: O(n)
- sorted array: O(1) - the first / last element
- singly-linked unsorted list: O(n)
- doubly-linked unsorted list: O(n)
- singly-linked sorted list:
  Min: O(1) - first element
  Max: O(1) - use a pointer for the list tail.
  the cost to find predecessor is on deletion.
- doubly-linked sorted list:
  Min: O(1) - first element
  Max: O(1) - use a pointer for the list tail.
  this pointer can be updated in constant time:
  on insertion, check if `last->next` is still NULL.
  on deletion, set `last` to the predecessor of `last` if the last element is deleted.

5. Predecessor / Successor

- unsorted array: O(n)
- sorted array: O(1) - A[x-1] and A[x+1]
- singly-linked unsorted list: O(n)
- doubly-linked unsorted list: O(n)
- singly-linked sorted list: 
Successor: O(1) - next item
Predecessor: O(n) - still have to traverse the list
- doubly-linked sorted list: O(1) - next and previous item

**Conclusion:**

A given data representation may permit efficient implementation of certain operations at the cost that other operations are expensive.
