## 3.7. Hashing and Strings

- A hash function maps keys to integers.
- Use the value of the hash function as an index into an array, and store the item at that index.

### Formula

- String `S` has length `n`
- `a` is the size of the alphabet that S is written in.
- `char(c)` map each symbol to a unique integer from `0` to `a - 1`.
- `m` is the number of slots in the hash table.
- The following function map each string to a unique (large) integer:
  `H(S) = sum(i: 0 -> n-1) (a^(n-1-i) \* char(S[i]))`
- Reduce the number to an integer between 0 and m-1:
  `k = H(S) mod m`
- Ideally: m is a large prime not too close to `2^i - 1` -> the resulting hash table will be uniformly distributed.

### 3.7.1. Collision Resolution

- 2 distinct keys will occasionally hash to the same value.

**Chaining:**

- Represent the hash table as an array of m linked lists.
- search, insertion, and deletion reduce to the corresponding problem in linked lists.
- If n keys is distributed uniformly, each list will contain roughly n/m elements -> constant size when m ~ n.
- Downside: lose a considerable amount of memory to pointers.

**Open addressing:**

- The hash table is maintains as an array of element, not buckets, each initialized to null.
- On insertion, just insert if the desired position is empty. If not, find the next open space and insert the item there (sequential probing).
- Searching: go to the appropriate hash value. If that's the item we want, return it. If not, keep checking through the length of the run.
- Deletion: we must re-insert all the items in the run following the hole.

**Comparison:**

- Both required O(m) to initialize an m-element hash table to null elements.
- Traversing: O(n + m) for Chaining, since we have to scan all m buckets. O(m) for Open Addressing, since n must be at most m.

**Chaining with doubly-linked list:**

The dictionary operations for n items

- Insert(L, x): O(1)
- Delete(L, x): O(1)
- Successor(L, x): O(n + m)
- Predecessor(L, x): O(n + m)
- Minimum(L): O(n + m)
- Maximum(L): O(n + m)
- Search(L, k):  
  Expected: O(n/m)  
  Worst case: O(n) - all items hash to the same value

### 3.7.2. Efficient String Matching via Hashing

**Problem:**

- Input: A text string t and a pattern string p.
- Output: Does t contain the pattern p as a substring, and if so where?

**Simplest algorithm:**

- |t| = n; |p| = m
- Search for p overlay in t: from position 0 to n - m
- This runs in O(nm) time. See `Section 2.5.3`

**Rabin-Karp algorithm:**

- Linear expected-time algorithm, based on hashing.
- Compute the hash value of p and the m-character substring starting from the i-th position of t.
- When the hash values agree, spend O(m) time to explicitly check the identity of 2 strings.
- This reduces string matching to n - m + 2 hash value computations (n - m + 1 windows of t, plus 1 hash of p), plus a small number of O(m) verification steps.
- The hash function applied to the m-character string starting from the j-th position of S:
  `H(S, j) = sum(i: 0 -> m-1) (a^(m-1-i) \* char(S[j+i]))`
- A little algebra reveals that:
  `H(S, j + 1) = a*(H(S, j) - a^(m-1) * char(s[j])) + char(s[j+m])`
- Once we know the hash value from 1 position, we can find hash value from the next position in constant time (The value of a^(m-1) can be computed once).

### 3.7.3. Duplicate Detection via Hashing

1. Is a given document D different from all the rest in a large corpus?

- hash D to an integer, and compare it to the hash codes of the rest of the corpus.
- only when there is a collision is D a possible duplicate.
- compare the few documents sharing the exact hash code.

2. Is part of this document plagiarized from a document in a large corpus?

- build a hash table of all overlapping windows (substrings) of length w in all the documents in the corpus.
- investigate further when there is a match of hash codes.
- choose w to be long enough. retain a small but well-chosen subset of the hash codes for each document.

3. How can I convince you that a file isn’t changed?

**Problem:**

- In a closed-bid auction, each party submits their bid in secret before the announced deadline.
- If you knew what the other parties were bidding, you could arrange to bid $1 more than the highest opponent.

**Solution:**

- Everyone submits a hash code of their actual bid prior to the deadline, and then submits the full bid after the deadline.
- The auctioneer will pick the largest full bid, but checks to make sure the
  hash code matches that submitted prior to the deadline.
